Get ready for local developement (#253)
opendata-swiss/ogdch-handbook: README.md

been extracted from the **Source**. These text strings are stored along with translations in `.po` files.
If no translation is given in these files: the fallback ist the orginal text in the **Source**.
The tool used for translations is
[sphinx-intl](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/advanced/intl.html)

**Locales**: Currently there are two locales of the handbook:
- a German locale at `source/locale/de`: the translations there are left empty, 
so that the fallback, the **Source** is used
- a French locale at `source/locale/fr`: stores the translatable strings from the **Source** together with French translations for all German texts. English texts have not been translated.

## Setup for local development

The handbook can be downloaded and setup locally on your Computer.
First open a terminal window and clone the repo:

```commandline
git clone git@github.com:opendata-swiss/ogdch-handbook.git
cd ogdch-handbook
```

If you want to be able to build the handbook locally from its 
**Source**, then you need to set up the virtual python3 environment and install the 
requirements, as shown below:

```
python3 -m venv p3venv 
source p3venv/bin/activate

> (p3venv) pip install wheel

Reviewer: I wonder if including `(p3env)` at the start of these lines will confuse users, because they might try to copy that into the terminal as well. What do you think?

Author: I wanted to make clear that the virtual python environment needs to be activated. But may be you are right: it might be more confusing: so I will remove it.

```commandline
git clone git@github.com:opendata-swiss/ogdch-handbook.git
cd ogdch-handbook
```

If you want to be able to build the handbook locally from its 
**Source**, then you need to set up the virtual python3 environment and install the 
requirements, as shown below:

```
python3 -m venv p3venv 
source p3venv/bin/activate
(p3venv) pip install wheel
(p3venv) pip install -r requirements.txt

> (p3venv) cp .env.dist .env

Reviewer: Why did you remove this line?

> The German locale is build from `source/locale/de` with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The German locale is built from `source/locale/de` with the following command:
```

```

## Build the German Documentation
Now everything is setup and you will be able to build the handbook locally and then view it 
in your browser.

The German documentation can be built locally like this:
## Build the German locale

The German locale is build from `source/locale/de` with the following command:

```
(p3venv) cd docs

> (p3venv) make clean

Reviewer: Why did you remove this line? If you don't think it's necessary here, I think it would still be nice to include it somewhere, with a note saying what `make clean` does (removes the `build/` directory).

> (p3venv) make -e SPHINXOPTS="-D language='de'" BUILDDIR="build/de" html

Reviewer: I think it could be useful to say which directory they have to run this command from. Otherwise, "The German locale is built from `source/locale/de`" could make them think they have to navigate to `source/locale/de` before running it. (The same for building the French locale below.)

> The French locale is build from `source/locale/fr` with the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The French locale is built from `source/locale/fr` with the following command:
```

The source of the handbook is located at the following places:

- `source/content` for the chapters
- `source/index.rst` for the main page

In order to make changes just edit the corresponding `.rst` files.

:warning: be aware that the French translations will stop working if you change German
text, that has a French translation stored in the French locale.

## Update the French Translation

When you changed a text in the **Source**, that has a translation in the French Locale,
you also need to change the corresponding extracted string in the Locale, so that the new 

> string can be found together with it's' translation when the Locale is build:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string can be found together with its translation when the Locale is built:
```

Example:  `source/index.rst`

```
Schön, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir unterstützen Sie dabei.
=====================================================================================
```

was changed to:

```
Gut, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir unterstützen Sie dabei.
=====================================================================================
```

### Identify the translation in the Locale

Find the corresponding `.po` file in the `locale/fr` directory:

In the example this would be `locale/fr/LC_MESSAGES/index.po`

```
#: ../../source/index.rst:15
msgid ""
"Schön, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir "
"unterstützen Sie dabei."
msgstr ""
"Vous souhaitez publier des données publiques ouvertes? Nous vous "
"apportons notre soutien!"
```

### Adapt the translation in the Locale

Change the old string and replace it with the new string:

```
#: ../../source/index.rst:15
msgid ""
"Gut, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir "
"unterstützen Sie dabei."
msgstr ""
"Vous souhaitez publier des données publiques ouvertes? Nous vous "
"apportons notre soutien!"
```

> Once that is done the French locale can be build again and the translation will be fixed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once that is done the French locale can be built again and the translation will be fixed.
```

## Extracting translatable strings from the Source

The `.po` files in the Locales don't have to be set manually: they can be generated.  
The way to generate them is the following:

### Command for translatable strings extraction:

> The following comman extracts all translatable strings from the **Source**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following command extracts all translatable strings from the **Source**:
```

```
make gettext
```

> It generates a new directory in the `build` directory: `build/getext` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It generates a new directory in the `build` directory: `build/gettext` 
```

The directory tree matches that of the `source/locale` directory trees.
So for every `.rst` file in the **Source** it contains a `.pot` file 

### Identify the translatable String for your Source change

Find the `.pot` file that contains the translatable strings. 

> In the example above this would be `build/getext/index.pot`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above this would be `build/gettext/index.pot`
```

```
#: ../../source/index.rst:15
msgid "Schön, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir unterstützen Sie dabei."
msgstr ""
```

### Transfer the translatable string to the Locale

> Copy thins into the `locale/fr/LC_MESSAGES/index.po` and replace the old phrase there by this 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Copy this into the `locale/fr/LC_MESSAGES/index.po` and replace the old phrase there with this 
```

new phrase: 

```
#: ../../source/index.rst:15
msgid ""
"Gut, dass Sie Open Government Data publizieren möchten! Wir "
"unterstützen Sie dabei."
msgstr ""
"Vous souhaitez publier des données publiques ouvertes? Nous vous "
"apportons notre soutien!"
```

Now you would be again ready to build the French Locale.

## Command to transfer the tranlatable strings automatically

The translatable string can be automatically transfered from the `.pot`files to the 
Locales. 

```
sphinx-intl update -p build/gettext -l de -l fr
```

:WARNING: Use this command with care as it has the following pitfalls:

> - some translations are marked with `#, fuzzy` in the Locales by the command and this command has to be removed, so that the translations will work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- some translations are marked with `#, fuzzy` in the Locales by the command and this line has to be removed, so that the translations will work
```

- The command can't be restricted to just some files: it will update all file in the Locales that it identifies as needing a change

## Linkchecker

> Sphinx also comes with a buildin linkchecker command. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sphinx also comes with a builtin linkchecker command. 
```
